So this is Hannah Romani interviewing Jenny Allen on the 4th of December 2017 for the
HLF Wander Brass 25 project.
Could you just confirm that you're willing to do this interview and you've been informed
of purpose and you give your informed consent?
I do.
You do?
Great.
Okay so maybe if you could just start off by telling me a little bit about when you
joined Wander Brass?
Okay, I joined Wander Brass probably about nine years ago after a couple of us had been
playing in another musical project which was a very community based scratch band when we
all picked up instruments that we hadn't played for a year since school and then we just sort
of played in that performance and we all really enjoyed playing together so much that we looked
for other things that we could join.
At first they were like, Wander Brass were like, yeah, trumpets sound great but don't
worry about the flutes.
Oh no!
So were there no flutes in Wander Brass then?
There were, there was just Brett and Kaz and a lady called Kate and they were like,
yeah come along but we're more interested in the trumpets.
So Anna Rogers and I joined on flute and Matt and Keith and Fran joined on trumpet and loved
it.
Oh cool, I didn't realise all four of you joined together.
Yeah, we all joined together.
It was just at the start of a project we were doing with King Django so we did our learning
period and then we did some street gigs and then eventually we ended up playing at Brecon
with King Django which was really fun.
Oh brilliant.
Okay, great so, okay so the four of you joined together.
Do you want to tell me a bit more about the King Django project?
I don't know much about that one.
Well that was working with a guy called King Django from America.
I think he's from New York and he's a scar musician, he plays the trombone and he came
over and he brought some of his tracks that he'd written and he taught them to us.
One of them we still do, it's called Buccaneer Bay.
Oh no way!
He got us to do some sort of scar music which I think, I wasn't in the band before this
but I think it kind of changed the direction of the band a little bit away from more sort
of jazz and New Orleans stuff into a new sort of scar idea which shook things up a bit and
it was interesting.
Some of the songs had singing in them so we did what he calls, I think he's like a crowd
of jerks in a room.
Singing is not meant to sound good, it's meant to sound like a load of people just
shouting words and having a good time so we did some tunes like that and we recorded them
in the atrium.
I don't know what happened to the recording and we just did them in Brecon and did a couple
of gigs.
We did one in the Club de la Barre and yeah that was kind of the introduction to the band
for us, the first project.
Sounds awesome.
So I remember one of the albums, one of the older albums is quite scary isn't it so I
guess that must have been, you must have made that one around that time.
I'm not sure actually, I can't remember.
It's got like Scaravan.
I think that was before actually, maybe just before, I'm not sure, I can't remember.
It was a while ago.
You say you went away?
Oh yeah I went after that project when we were recording the album after that, I went
away for a year, travelled.
Oh okay.
Cool.
Did you miss it while you were gone?
Yes, loads.
And when we came back they said we could come in and record over our solos.
I actually am on the album.
That's so nice.
I'm so smart but we're not actually playing in the heads of stuff, we've just got a couple
of solos on two tracks.
That's really cool.
So which album was that?
I think it's Blown Away, whichever one's got Buckethead Bay on it.
Okay cool.
It's all a bit blur.
Yeah, oh nice.
So can you tell me about any projects that have really massively stood out for you?
Maybe it's the King Dango or maybe it's something else.
I guess the biggest one aside from this project has been the 2012 project with Jason Yard.
I think it brought the band together in more ways than one because musically the piece
was really difficult and I think it put us all in the same boat for a while because obviously
there's a lot of different skill levels in Wunderbass.
It's not just for beginners and it's not just for professionals but I think everybody found
Jason's piece quite tough to get the hang of and spending two days in the studio learning
it, getting it down, I think it was a good leveller and everybody felt like we'd sort
of bonded a bit around that, especially getting to travel to London and be part of something
in a wider context.
So that one really stood out and obviously Jason's great.
Got to go to the Druidstone and do some workshops with him there and that's always really good
for the band because everybody has a really good time.
And I think that's the sort of thing that makes Wunderbass what it is because if you're
happy and you're having a good time the music that you make is going to be better rather
than like a gruelling sort of schedule that's going to sort of demand a lot of you.
But having a challenge, something to work towards is something that's really good,
especially when you get there and it all works and it comes together, I think that makes
people feel like they're really part of something.
Yeah, definitely.
Cool.
And has being in Wunderbass led to any other sort of musical endeavours for you?
It has, yes.
I now play in a swing band with Rob and with Yorri who sometimes drums for Wunderbass.
Rob and Jenny Bradley and I formed a sort of gypsy, Balkan dance band called Capra Mame
which was always fun.
And just generally meeting people through Wunderbass has opened up some opportunities.
I played in a show called Magic with Jenny and somebody who used to be in Wunderbass,
Gareth Roberts, who's the conductor and that was really fun.
And we did West Side Story, the music for that, which is hard.
And yeah, it just opened up quite a few chances to do things which I wouldn't ever have done
had it not been for Wunderbass.
And what do you think about the way the band has changed over the years, both musically
and in terms of the people who are in it and the atmosphere and obviously your own position
within the band.
You're on the committee now, obviously.
So obviously when you join you just turn up with your flute and you don't know many people
and all the rest of it.
So how do you feel?
Sorry, that was a lot of questions in one.
I think all the changes that happen in Wunderbass are pretty organic because the fundamentals
of the band don't change.
We've always rehearsed on a Tuesday at half past seven until ten o'clock.
We always have a break in the middle.
And I think that the changes that happen are to do with the people who join and the projects
that we do.
There's always a core of people who are behind what happens with the band and that's generally
the people on the committee.
And I think a lot of the time that that's...
I think everybody on the committee tries to listen to what the band wants to do and be
proactive as well.
So obviously that will push the band in different directions.
My position in the band's obviously changed a lot and I'm quite involved with everything
now.
But it's really good because you get a lot out of it as well.
It's helped my personal career development.
I've got work, like professional work, not musical work through Wunderbass that I wouldn't
have got if I hadn't had the chance to develop certain skills through the band.
So I think you get out what you put in a lot of the time.
I think the band changes when people realise that more, once they realise what they put
in is actually making the band better.
It's making themselves have a better experience and doing more projects drives that.
Going to Budapest I think was a big changer as well for people who realise actually this
is really fun.
If we have fun when we're playing it gets more fun.
So I think the changes are driven by the people in the band and the projects that we do.
Yeah, that makes sense.
What professional skills have you learnt that you're just saying that they contributed to
your career development?
What have you learnt?
Fundraising.
I've been working with Jenny Bradley on raising funds for the band, getting sponsorship,
not sponsorship, grants and awards, which obviously she's very experienced at and it's
amazing to get the chance to work in situ in a real life situation with somebody who's
got those skills and that experience and you can learn a lot from that and putting it into
practice and seeing it be successful is really good.
And it's meant that I've been able to do that for other parts of my work.
It's also a platform, it's not just a platform for me to play and to perform, it means that
the opportunities are there to develop things like marketing skills and writing web copy
and developing web content.
I mean it's just great, it looks really good on your CV if you can say I did the website
for this and this and Wunderbress is one of them because everybody knows Wunderbress so
just think about that really.
Yeah, cool.
What do you think would be your proudest moment being in Wunderbress?
I think it's when we got the acceptance that we'd got the HLF grant, I think that was
like a really, because we put in a lot of effort, both of us, actually all of us did,
everybody on the committee put in a lot of work and seeing it pay off and it's great
and also just like whenever the band plays really and it goes down really well it's like
an achievement for everybody, it's nice to see.
What about musically, what's your...
Wow.
I guess the Jason project was quite an achievement, I mean that music was difficult and the fact
that everybody, I was equally proud to be part of something that sounded like that but
I was also proud of everybody's, how hard everyone had worked to make it come together,
people practiced in their own time, they didn't just rock up at rehearsal and put in the bare
minimum of effort, people really tried and I think that paid off.
So yeah, I'd say the Jason project and recently when we did the Community Music Wales 25th
Birthday, that was really nice as well, that was just like a, because yeah, it was two
different gigs in the same day, we'd done some evening work out in the street and then
we went and we played in there in the theatre in front of a seated audience who really enjoyed
it and everybody got really on board and that was a good performance.
Okay, do you have anything else you'd like to say about Wander Brass, anything you think
that really needs to be recorded for the future, for people to know about?
Yeah I do, I think Rob has done an amazing thing, it's not an easy job what he has to
do and a lot of the time it can be really challenging and I think that letting it be
and letting it develop as it is has just really contributed massively to the community and
kind of not just the musical community but generally, I mean it gives people the opportunity
to just really actively partake in something that's creative and I think it's a model
that people could copy and use elsewhere, I think that would be really great if people
could see how Wander Brass works and develop their own thing, I think it would be amazing
for different communities.
And what do you think about the way that it sort of fluctuates between being, obviously
it's not a band in which you're meant to come to learn your instruments but sometimes
we have to modify rehearsals for example to accommodate people who have lower levels of
experience or whatever, how do you feel about the way that rehearsals work to accommodate
that?
I think that in order for the band to be successful and to actually be what it is, we have to
put out professional standard performances because by being part of something that is
professional standard, that is what gives people the confidence and something to work
towards and the sense of pride when they've achieved it and so I think that, yeah, I think
we need to maintain the professional standard but it needs to be accessible to people as
well, so tailoring rehearsals like you mentioned is a really good way of doing that.
I mean we don't have the capacity to teach instrument, like the techniques of basic
instrumentation, not that word, playing your instrument.
So realistically we could never get down to that level but in order to put out the product
that we sell, because ultimately that's what it is, then we have to make it as good as
we can possibly make it but by letting people in at an entry level, I think that's all,
there's a platform for people to aim at and there's a way in to get there if that makes
sense, kind of, clumsily put but yeah, I think it does two jobs in one.
So that.
Yeah, cool.
Okay, great, I think that's everything.
Do you have anything to add?
No, that's everything.
Thanks.
Thanks, Kelly.